
THE POPULAR STORY

OF

BLUE BEARD

Embellished with neat Engravings

By Anonymous

[Illustration: 0001]

[Illustration: 0004]

[Illustration: 0005]

[Illustration: 0006]




THE POPULAR STORY OF BLUE-BEARD

|A LONG time ago, and at a considerable distance from any town, there
lived a gentleman, who was not only in possession of great riches, but
of the largest estates in that part of the country. Although he had some
very elegant neat mansions on his estates, he generally resided in a
magnificent castle, beautifully situated on a rising ground, surrounded
with groves of the finest evergreens, and other choice trees and shrubs.

The inside of this fine castle was even more beautiful than the
outside; for the rooms were all hung with the richest damask, curiously
ornamented; the Chairs and sofas were covered with the finest velvet,
fringed with gold; and his table-dishes and plates were either of silver
or gold, finished in the most elegant style. His carriages and horses
might have served a king, and perhaps were finer than any monarch's of
the present day. The gentleman's appearance, however, did not altogether
correspond to his wealth; for, to a fierce disagreeable countenance, was
added an ugly blue beard, which made him an object of fear and disgust
in the neighbourhood, where he usually went by the name of Blue Beard.

There resided, at some considerable distance from Blue Beard's castle,
an old lady and her two daughters, who were people of some rank, but by
no means wealthy. The two young ladies were very pretty, and the fame of
their beauty having reached Blue Beard, he determined to ask one of them
in marriage. Having ordered a carriage, he called at their house, where
he saw the two young ladies, and was very politely received by their
mother, with whom he begged a few moments conversation.

[Illustration: 0009]

|After the two young ladies left the room, he began by describing his
immense riches, and then told her the purpose of his visit, begging she
would use her interest in his favour. They were both so lovely, he said,
that he would be happy to get either of them for his wife, and would
therefore leave it to their own choice to determine upon the subject,
and immediately took his leave.

When the proposals of Blue Beard were mentioned to the young ladies by
their mother, both Miss Anne and her sister Fatima protested, that
they would never marry an ugly man, and particularly one with such a
frightful blue beard; because, although he possessed immense riches,
it was reported in the country, that he had married several beautiful
ladies, and nobody could tell what had become of them.

Their mother said, that the gentleman was agreeable in his conversation
and manners; that the ugliness of his facs, and the blue beard, were
defects which they would soon be reconciled to from habit: that his
immense riches would procure them every luxury their heart could desire;
and he was so civil, that she was certain the scandalous reports about
his wives must be entirely without foundation.

The two young ladies were as civil as they possibly could be, in order
to conceal the disgust they felt at Blue Beard, and, to soften their
refusal, replied to this effect,--That, at present, they had no desire
to change their situation; but if they had, the one sister could never
think of depriving the other of so good a match, and that they did not
wish to be separated.

|Blue Beard having called next day, the old lady told him what her
daughters had said; on which he sighed deeply, and pretended to be
very much disappointed; but as he had the mother on his side, he still
continued his visits to the family. Blue Beard, knowing the attractions
that fine houses, fine furniture, and fine entertainments, have on the
minds of ladies in general, invited the mother, her two daughters, and
two or three other ladies who were then on a visit to them, to spend a
day or two with him at his castle.

[Illustration: 0011]

Blue Beard's invitation was accepted, and having spent a considerable
time in arranging their wardrobe, and in adorning their persons, they
all set out for the splendid mansion of Blue Beard.

On coming near the castle, although they had heard a great deal of the
taste and expense that had been employed in decorating it, they were
struck with the beauty of the trees that overshadowed the walks through
which they passed, and with the fragrancy of the flowers which perfumed
the air. When they reached the castle, Blue Beard, attended by a number
of his servants in splendid dresses, received them with the most polite
courtesy, and conducted them to a magnificent drawing-room.

An elegant repast was ready in the dining-room, to which they adjourned.
Here they were again astonished by the grandeur of the apartment and the
elegance of the entertainment, and the rooms that were open, and were
truly astonished at the magnificence that everywhere met their view.

The time rolled pleasantly away a-midst a succession of the most
agreeable felt so happy, that the evening passed away before they were
aware.

[Illustration: 0013]

|Next day, after they had finished breakfast, the ladies proceeded to
examine the pictures and furniture of the amusements, consisting of
hunting, music, dancing, and banquets, where the richest wines, and most
tempting delicacies, in most luxurious profusion, presented themselves
in every direction.

The party felt so agreeable amidst these scenes of festivity, that they
continued at the castle several days, during which the cunning Blue
Beard, by every obsequious service, tried to gain the favour of his fair
guests. Personal attentions, even although paid us by an ugly creature,
seldom fail to make a favourable impression; it was therefore no wonder
that Fatima, the youngest of the two sisters, began to think Blue Beard
a very polite, pleasant, and civil gentleman; and that the beard, which
she and her sister had been so much afraid of, was not so very blue.

A short time after her return home, Fatima, who was delighted with the
attention which had been paid her at the castle, told her mother
that she did not now feel any objections to accept of Blue Beard as a
husband. The old lady immediately communicated to him the change in her
daughter's sentiments.

[Illustration: 0015]

|Blue Beard, who lost no time in paying the family a visit, was in a few
days privately married to the young lady, and soon after the ceremony,
Fatima, accompanied by her sister, returned to the castle the wife of
Blue Beard.

On arriving there, they were received at the entrance by all his
retinue, attired in splendid dresses, and Blue Beard after saluting his
bride, led the way to an elegant entertainment, where, every thing that
could add to to their comfort being prepared, they spent the evening in
the most agreeable manner.

|The next day, and every succeeding day, Blue Beard always varied the
amusements, and a month had passed away imperceptibly, when he told his
wife that he was obliged to leave her for a few weeks, as he had some
affairs to transact in a distant part of the country, which required his
personal attendance.

"But," said he, "my dear Fatima, you may enjoy yourself in my absence in
any way that will add to your happiness, and you can invite your friends
to make the time pass more agreeably, for you are sole mistress in this
castle, Here are the keys of the two large wardrobes; this is the key
of the great box that contains the best plate, which we use for company;
this of my strong box, where I keep my money; and this belongs to the
casket, in which are all my jewels. Here also is a master-key to all the
rooms in the house; but this small key belongs to the blue closet at
the end of the long gallery on the ground floor. I give you leave," he
continued, "to open, or do what you like with all the rest of the castle
except this closet: now, my dear, remember you must not enter it, nor
even put the key into the lock. If you do not obey me in this, expect
the most dreadful of punishments."

[Illustration: 0017]

She promised him implicit obedience to his orders, and then accompanied
him to the gate, where Blue Beard, after sa luting her in a tender
manner, stepped into the coach, and drove away.

|When Blue Beard was gone, Fatima sent a kind invitation to her friends
to come immediately to the castle, and ordered a grand entertainment to
be prepared for their reception. She also sent a messenger to her two
brothers, both officers in the army, who were quartered about forty
miles distant, requesting they would obtain leave of absence, and spend
a few days with her. So eager were her friends to see the apartments and
the riches of Blue Beard's castle, of which they had heard so much, that
in less than two hours after receiving notice, the whole company were
assembled, with the exception of her brothers, who were not expected
till the following day.

As her guests had arrived long before the time appointed them for the
entertainment. Fatima took them thro' every apartment in the castle,
and displayed all the wealth she had acquired by her marriage with
Blue Beard. They went from room to room, and from wardrobe to wardrobe,
expressing fresh wonder and delight at every new object they came to;
but their surprise was increased when they entered the drawing-rooms,
and saw the grandeur of the furniture.

During the day, Fatima was so much engaged, that she never once thought
of the blue closet, which Blue Beard had ordered her not to open; but
when all the visitors were gone, she felt a great curiosity to know its
contents. She took out the key, which was made of the finest gold, and
went to consult with her sister on the subject. Anne used every argument
she could think of to dissuade Fatima from her purpose, and reminded her
of the threats of Blue Beard; but all in vain, for Fatima was now bent
on gratifying her curiosity.

She therefore, in spite of all her sister could do, seized one of the
candles, and hurried down stairs to the fatal closet. On reaching the
door she stopped, and began to reason with herself on the propriety
of her conduct; but her curiosity at length overcame every other
consideration, and, with a trembling hand, she applied the key to the
lock, and opened the door. She had only advanced a few steps, when the
most frightful scene met her view, and, struck with horror and dismay,
she dropped the key of the closet.

[Illustration: 0020]

|She was in the midst of blood, and the heads, bodies, and mutilated
limbs of murdered ladies lay scattered on the floor. These ladies had
all been married to Blue Beard, and had suffered for their imprudent
curiosity, the key, which was the gift of a fairy, always betraying
their fatal disobedience.

The terror of Fatima was not diminished on observing these dreadful
words on the wall--"_The Reward of Disobedience and Imprudent
Curiosity!_" She trembled violently; but, on recovering a little, she
snatched up the key, and having again locked the door, left this abode
of horror.

As soon as she reached her sister's chamber, she related the whole of
her horrid adventure. They then examined the key, but it was all covered
with blood, and they both turned pale with fear. They spent a good part
of the night in trying to clean off the blood from the key, but it was
without effect, for though they washed and scoured it with brick
dust and sand, no sooner was the blood removed from one side, than
it appeared on the other. Fatigued with their exertions, they at last
retired to bed, where they passed a sleepless and anxious night.

|Fatima rose at a late hour next day, and consulted with her sister how
she ought to proceed. She thought first of escaping from the castle, but
as her brothers were expected in an hour or two, she resolved to wait
their arrival.

A loud knock at the gate made her almost leap for joy, and she cried,
"they are come! they are come!" but what was her consternation when Blue
Beard hastily opened the door, and entered. It was impossible for Fatima
to conceal her agitation, although she pretended to be very happy at his
sudden and unexpected return.

Blue Beard, who guessed what she had been about, requested the keys,
in order, as he said, that he might change his dress. She went to her
chamber, and soon returned with the keys, all except the one belonging
to the blue closet He took the keys from her with seeming indifference,
and after glancing at them minutely, said, rather sternly, "How is this,
Fatima! I do not see the key of the blue closet here! Go and bring it to
me instantly."

[Illustration: 0023]

The poor girl, feeling the crisis of her fate approaching, said, "I
will go and search for it," and left the apartment in tears. She went
straight to her sister's chamber, where they again tried, but in vain,
to remove the blood from the key. The voice of Blue Beard again calling
for her, she was forced to return, and reluctantly to give him the fatal
key.

On examining the key, Blue Beard burst into a terrible rage. "Pray
Madam," said he, "how came this blood to be here?"

"I am sure I do not know," replied she, trembling, and turning pale.

"What! do you not know!" cried Blue Beard, in a voice like thunder,
which made poor Fatima start with fear; "but I know well! You have been
in the forbidden blue closet! And since you are so fond of prying into
secrets, you shall take up your abode with the ladies you saw there."

[Illustration: 0024]

Almost expiring with fear and terror, the trembling Fatima sunk upon her
knees, and implored him in the most piteous manner to forgive her.
But the cruel Blue Beard, deaf to her intreaties, drew his dreadful
scymetar, and bid her prepare for immediate death.

Blue Beard had raised his arm to give the fatal blow, when a dreadful
shriek from her sister, who at that moment entered the apartment,
arrested his attention. She entreated him to spare the life of Fatima,
but he was deaf to her intercession, and would only grant her one
quarter of an hour, that she might make her peace with Heaven, before he
put her to death.

Blue Beard then dragged her up to a large hall in the top of the tower
of the castle, to prevent her groans being heard, to which they were
followed by her sister. He then told her to make the best use of
the time, as she might expect his return the moment it elapsed, and
immediately left the place.

|When alone with her sister, Fatima felt her dreadful situation, and
again burst into tears. Only fifteen minutes between her and the most
cruel death, without the least chance of escape; for Blue Beard had
secured the door when he retired, and the staircase they saw only led to
the battlements. Fatima's thoughts were now turned to her brothers, whom
she expected that day; and she requested her sister to ascend to the top
of the tower, to see if there was any appearance of them.

Fatima's sister immediately ascended to the top of the battlements,
while the poor trembling girl below, every minute, cried out, "Sister
Anne, my dear sister Anne, do you see any one coming yet?"

Her sister always replied, "There is not a human being in view, and I
see nothing but the sun and the grass."

She was upon her knees bewailing her fate, when Blue Beard, in a
tremendous voice, cried out, "Are you ready?" the time is expired and she
heard the sound of his footsteps approaching. She again supplicated
him to allow her five minutes longer to finish her prayers, which he,
knowing she was completely within his power, granted her, and again left
her.

Fatima again renewed her inquiries to her sister "Do you see any one
coming yet?"

Her sister replied, "There is not a human being within sight."

When the five minutes were elapsed,

"I see," said her sister, "a cloud of dust rising a little to the left."

In breathless agitation, she cried, "Do you think it is my brothers?"

The voice of Blue Beard was heard bawling out, "Are you ready yet?"

She again beseeched him to allow her only two minutes more, and then
addressed her sister, "Dear Anne, do you see any one coming yet?"

[Illustration: 0027]

"Alas! no, my dearest Fatima," returned her sister, "it is only a flock
of sheep."

Again the voice of Blue Beard was heard, and she begged for one minute
longer. She then called out for the last time, "Sister Anne, do you see
no one coming yet?"

|Her sister quickly answered, "I see two men on horseback, but they are
still a great way off."

"Thank heaven," exclaimed Fatima, "I shall yet be saved, for it must be
my two brothers! My dearest sister, make every signal in your power to
hasten them forward, or they will be too late." Blue Beard's patience
being now exhausted, he burst open the door in a rage, and made a blow
at the wretched Fatima, with the intention of striking off her head; but
she sprang close to him and evaded it. Furious at being foiled in his
aim, he threw her from him, and then seizing her by the hair of the
head, was in the act of striking her a blow with his scymetar, when the
noise of persons approaching, with hasty steps, arrested the progress
of his sanguinary arm. Blue Beard had not time to conjecture who the
intruders might be, when the door opened, and two officers, with their
swords drawn, rushed into the apartment.

Struck with terror, the guilty wretch released his wife from his grasp,
and without attempting to resist, he tried to effect his escape from the
resentment of her brothers; but they pursued and seized him before he
had got above twenty paces from the place.

[Illustration: 0029]

After reproaching Blue Beard with his cruelty, they dragged him back
to the spot where he intended to have murdered their sister; and there,
stabbing him to the heart with their swords, he expired, uttering the
most horrid oaths and execrations.

|Fatima, who had fallen to the ground at the time Blue Beard quitted
his hold of her, still lay in the same situation insensible; for the
appearance of her brothers, at the moment she expected certain death,
had thrown her into a faint, which continued during the whole of the
time they were engaged in despatching her husband.

The two young officers now turned their attention to their sister, whom
they raised from the ground; but she could hardly be persuaded of her
safety, till they pointed to where Blue Beard lay extended and lifeless.

Fatima, on recovering a little, tenderly embraced her deliverers; and
the appearance of their sister Anne, who had come down from the top of
the battlements, added to their happiness.

[Illustration: 0031]

As all those horrid murders which had been committed by Blue Beard, were
unknown to his domestics, on whose credulity he imposed by falsehoods,
which they had no means of detecting, Fatima and her brothers thought
the most prudent way to act, was to assemble them together, and then
disclose the wickedness of their late master.

By the direction of Fatima, her two brothers conducted all the servants
to the dreadful scene of her husband's cruelties, and then showing them
his dead body, related the whole occurrences which had taken place. They
all said that his punishment was not adequate to what he deserved, and
begged that they might be continued in the service of their mistress.

As Blue Beard had no relations, Fatima was sole heir to the whole of his
immense property, and mistress of the castle, in the possession of which
she was confirmed by the laws of the country. She then sent notice to
all the families in the neighbourhood of the death of her husband, and
the horrid proofs of his cruelty were laid open for two days to all who
chose to inspect them. He was then buried privately, along with all the
bodies of the ladies he had murdered, and the fatal closet underwent a
complete repair, which removed every trace of his barbarity.

Soon after this, Fatima gave a magnificent entertainment to all her
friends, where happiness was seen in every face; and on this occasion
the poor, who were assembled for many miles round, partook most
liberally of her bounty.

Though possessed of riches almost inexhaustible, Fatima disposed of them
with so much discretion, that she gained the esteem of every one who
knew her. She bestowed handsome fortunes on her two brothers; and to her
sister, who was married about two months after, she gave a very large
dowry.

The beauty, riches, and amiable conduct of Fatima, attracted a number of
admirers, and among others, a young nobleman of very high rank, who,
to a handsome person, added every quality calculated to make a good
husband; and after a reasonable time spent in courtship, their marriage
was celebrated with great rejoicings.


FINIS







End of Project Gutenberg's The Popular Story of Blue Beard, by Anonymous

